CINE, the Council on International Non-Theatrical events has awarded this film
a Golden Eagle in token of its
excellence and has selected it to
represent the United States of America
in international motion picture events abroad.
Farewell, ETAOIN SHRDLU, Mixtrack take one
We are fast approaching press time for
the first edition of tomorrow morning's
paper. This printer has just finished
makeup of a page. In the next 56 minutes,
all pages must be finished and recorded
to meet the Edition deadline of 9:00 PM.
But tonight's deadline is special...
this New York Times mirror image inlet
of tomorrow's date line reads backwards
as Sunday July 2nd 1978. It marks the
last day of an age-old method of
printing in this composing room. What you
are now witnessing will exist after
tonight only as a film historic record,
for the century of the linotype machine
is nearing its end. Using 535 degree
molten lead it sets solid lines of type
called hot type cast in newspaper
column width. Now cooled, a printer's
hands prepare the lines for insertion
into a column of the page. Headlines are
still set by hand with type stored in
traditional California cases and in time-worn
Ludlow cabinets, by morning relics
of the past. Letter by letter the printer
forms the words in his composing stick,
in the same way that Gutenberg, the
first printer of the western world, did
more than five centuries ago.
Brass moulds of letters are assembled in
a different composing stick also for
headlines. Inside this Ludlow machine,
which was invented a quarter of a
century after the linotype, they will be
cast from liquid lead to form a solid
slug of type. By tomorrow, this Ludlow too
will be a museum piece.
These steel tables for page make up are
called printer stones. They have been
gradually abandoned over the past months.
A radical changeover has taken place,
for a new era of computerized, electronic,
automated, and cold type photo technology
has begun. It started in the brightly lit
area beyond these two dark hopes of
discarded linotype machines. Now lined up
NOTE I cannot identify the word characterized as "hope" - anyone who clearly
understands the word used would be welcome to fix these subtitles.
for shipment, they have been the old
reliables here for decades. Tonight, 60 of
the once 140 linotypes - the largest
battery of any newspaper in the world -
are on their final stint. Before the rush
to Edition time, a makeup man spoke to
us about this machine. 'You know a hundred
years ago a man named Ottmar Mergenthaler
invented a machine called the linotype.
Now it's not a machine that's well known
by most people, but I find that it was
the automation of its day. The only thing
is I think it was the machine that made
mass education possible, it brought the
price of books within the range of the
average working person. This is the
machine over here. Now it's practically
unchanged in a hundred years. I feel if
old man Mergenthaler came back he
could probably go over to that machine
sit down and set up a couple of
galleys of type without any problems
at all. If there were any problems as far
as fixing the machine I'm sure he could
get up and fix it. But that's how long
that machine has lasted, a hundred
years."
It all begins with this machine, really
three machines in one: assembly, casting,
and redistribution. In this portion of
the machine we keep these brass
mattresses which have a letter punched
into their edge, in this case the letter
"M". When I press a key these mattresses
will fall along this gravity chute, and
into the assembler. If I press this M,
you'll see that M come down. There it is.
Now when I want to space a word, I'll drop
in a space band, which is a steel wedge.
It slides up and down and spreads the
line to the exact size that I want in a
column so that every line is exactly
equal to the other in width. When we send
the line into the casting machine this
is what happens: if we take these
mattresses they'll come down and face
against this steel mold. Hot metal, molten
lead will be poured into that steel mold.
This mattress will be faced against here
with the mold of the mattress against
the top. The lead will harden and pick up
the image from the inside of this mold
and this mattress. It will turn around
through here, it will harden it will be
trimmed, and it will be ejected... right
here. Now let's watch a line go in: this
one's just about ready. Drawing across
now, the bands are spreading the line out
now, the line is being pumped in to hot
lead, it's hardening now, it's being trimmed
and here's your new line of type. But the
real machine is in the back it was a
watchmaker who invented it. This uniquely
shaped eccentric cam is the heart of his
entire system. As it rotates, it programs
all the intricate operations of this
automatic producer of type for the
composing of the paper. It makes the
linotype machine run like a huge wound
up clock, ticking with perfect precision.
In the meantime, these mattresses have
been redistributed and transferred into
those magazines and we can use them
again and again. This story is about
finished now, we can take it over to the
bank and get a galley proof, send it into
the proof room for proofreading, and when
we're finished with that we'll take the
type and put it either on a correction
bank or maybe directly into the page and
wait for the corrections. These latest
machines without keyboards have built-in
teletypesetter units. Instead of fingers
on keys, perforated tape does the work,
like the old music roll in a player
piano. This enables one person to monitor
three machines at once. A solid bar or
"pig" of lead is lowered into the melting
pot to refill it for casting.
Sign language is used among the paper's
many deaf printers. Instead of three
lines a minute the old manual way, each
machine now sets 14 lines a minute. It's
as far as mechanical automation could go
in the pre-electronic age. Lines of type
and picture cuts are made up into
full-page forms, guided by editors' layout
sheets.
"Where does this thing go?"
"All right look you want to make a box
out of it?"
"We all done here?" "Yeah, it was all I got."
"We want to push it around, or do you want to end here?"
"Stick the box down in here."
"You want to make a box out of it and
then turn this?" The closest cooperation
is needed between the page editor and
the makeup. Together they almost talk
the type into the page form, coax it, cajole it,
to make it fit, as they work
against the clock. Everyone is aware of
the time. Only forty minutes are left to
the nine o'clock First Edition deadline.
From now on, a page a minute, forty more
pages, must be completed, locked up in
these page forms and ready for the
pressers. Metal engravings like these
are cut down to size and precisely trimmed.
The cuts will print up as the drawings
and photos you see in the paper every
day. The handling of type and cuts is the
job of the makeup man while the page
editor indicates to him what she wants.
Reading the type upside down and
backwards, he sees a reverse image of what
will be the final printed page, and may
even catch an overlooked error.
"What does this say?" "Moaning in pain others, you had 'others' in there... get it out of there, that's a bad 's'." Only 14 minutes to
go. Everyone feels the urgency.
Pages are nearing completion. Makeups
tighten keys to bring type and cuts
closely together
this keeps pieces from falling out when
forms are moved off the stones. This page
is about done.
Almost finished. The editor sends this
one on its way. The presses are waiting. Trucks,
trains, and planes must be met to rush
the paper to the city, to the country, and
to the world. Now this one is on its way.
And the last one to close is page one.
"Okay on one!"
On time. And now a work break, and also a
party for old-time linotype operator
Albert Tanguier. "Over 49 years being
in the composing room. A senior
member of the priority list. The number one
man on the priority list!" "How do you feel about this?" "Well I feel I
feel that they call it progress but as
far as I'm concerned it is not. I would
like it to stay the way it was, you know.
Keep the old machine running."
"How long have you worked here?"
"A month short of 49 years."
"How old are you?"
"75 and a half."
"75 and a half! Are you retiring tonight?"
"Yes, yes, yes, yes."
"Let's have a drink on him!"
"I'm glad I had so many good friends."
This worker chalks up his
sentiments: 'End of an era, good while it
lasted,
crying won't help.' "I find it very sad,
very sad. I've learned the new stuff,
the new processes and all but I've been a
printer now for 26 years, I've been in
this place for 20 years, six years
apprenticeship and 20 years journeyman. ANd
these are words that aren't just tossed
around, they've always meant
something to us printers. I hate to see it.
It's inevitable that we're going to
go into computers all the knowledge I've
acquired over these 26 years is
all locked up in a little box now
called a computer, and I think probably most
jobs are going to end up the same way."
"Do you think computers are a good idea in general?"
"Oh there's no doubt about it
they're gonna benefit everybody
eventually, how long that will take I don't
know." Carefully, back on the stone
for changes by the news department for
the second, the Late City Edition. A
galley of new type for a late-breaking
story is proofed up to be read for
accuracy. Corrections are checked. Lines
with errors are replaced by corrected
lines, and page one is ready to go again
for the new deadline, 11:00 p.m. This
time we follow it to the making of a
stereotype mat.
The mat is a damp sheet of flexible
cardboard. A solid steel roller will
press it against the hundreds of
separate lines and picture cuts locked
together in this page form. Five minutes
to the 11 o'clock deadline. The
stereotyper taps down a spacing lid so
that it won't print. The mat will soon be
curved and dried into a half cylinder
form. From it, curved solid lead plates
will be cast, to fit on the rotary
presses. The pressure of one ton per
square inch is forced upon the cardboard.
The raised lead type presses into the mat,
forming a mold of recessed letters.
The mat is now right reading, and ready
for casting.
Down into the stereo casting
room three stories below street level, in
the Times building hot lead will now pour
into the recessed impressions of type in
this curved mat.
Casting starts.
These mammoth machines are up for sale.
Some will go under the hammer at auction. A
few will be cannibalized for spare parts.
Nine identical page plates to run on
nine presses at the same time are cooled
in these steel chambers before rolling
into the press room.
"When is this operation gonna close up?"
"It's gonna close up in the morning."
"How do you feel about it?"
"Another... 'innovation'? A new process we're moving into?"
"When I think of these machines costing over $100,000 apiece to
be junked it kind of leaves me loose.
You know this is as far as
they could go, though. As far as the
automation with the hot metal this as
far as the Times could go.
"What's that gonna mean to you, personally?"
"Means I have to learn a new
process." One after another into the
pressroom. Warning bells ring when the
presses start up.
"Page one, Sports!"
These heavy plates
on their snaking and criss-crossing
tracks, are making their final run to the
nine presses tonight. Will the new
technology just a few hours away make a
big change down here? A pressman shrugs
it off. "Instead of using red forty pound
plates, and locking them up...
instead of using these lead weights
what we do is use a plastic plate that
only weighs a few ounces,
and it goes on a cylinder, there's a magnetic bar
that holds it on. So you just get the
hang of putting it on that's all. The rest of the job
won't change significantly."
Cheering reached the last time that a
40-pound half-cylinder plate of lead
will ever again be mounted on these
presses.
Scrap from the previous press run is
clear from the conveyors. They carry the
finished papers up to the street level
above. Now the last reversal from wrong
reading type to the final, inked, right
reading, printed page.
It all started on the linotype machine
upstairs, and it ends up... here.
And the presses keep rolling through the
night.
This is goodbye.
Generations of linotype operators have
often run their fingers down the first
two rows of keys, releasing mats that
read "ETAOIN SHRDLU". This fills out
lines that start with keyboard errors.
The last bad line is discarded, at the
end of the story. Motor off, a last touch
of familiar brass mats,
light out for good.
It is the end of the age of hot type
mechanical printing
and the beginning of the new: the
computerized cold type, the electronic.
These seasoned printers, retrained, have
made the transition from the old to the
new.
The electronic images of letters that I
have just set on this video display
screen,
I'll now send to the computer. Where it
is processed, stored, and brought back
when required for corrections.
Back to the computer. When needed a touch
of a key returns it to the editor. It is
then changed to the desired column width,
style, size of type, and hyphenation,
followed by further keyboarding of
headlines and bylines. Then, to one of
five photo typesetters, each an
electronic mirror. Inside, a web of
components and wiring does the work of
140 linotypes generating a vast
array of electronic type images on a
concealed cathode ray tube.
These images are contacted onto
photosensitive paper at a thousand lines
a minute.
Emerging from the darkroom, the photo
sensitized paper has now been
transformed by a developing machine into
photographic cold type, ready for
full-page paste up. This productivity
leap, from fourteen to a thousand lines a
minute is made possible several floors
above by a battery of computers. These
units contain magnetized memory disks
and electronic digital systems, which
store and process all the data sent from
below. Wwitches and buttons at a touch
bring us into an ever-advancing world of
automation, computerization, and
programmed electron flow.
Humidity and temperature, monitored and
controlled around the clock, are critical.
These cabinets hold layered packs of
yellow magnetic disks and others like
this. The disks, in operation, spin at 140
miles an hour. More than eight million
words can be stored and sent back by
each disk pack and cold type on paper
keeps on flowing. Photo technology has
conquered hot metal. The typeset paper is
cut, waxed on the back for adhesion, and
pasted up on full-page boards on these
tables. "That'll bring the type down to
here."
"There's gonna be new type here?"
"Yes."
"Core, right that's holding it.
Thank you, Jenny."
From obituaries to
sports, to the worlds of business
entertainment, real estate, classified and
display advertising, and of course, the
news. These color patches will soon be
replaced by headlines. They are now being
cut to exact size.
No more molten lead. He has made it from
hot type makeup to cold type paste up.
The last headline in place, ready to go.
Page one will now be transferred
electronically through impulses from.
this laser scanner machine to the plate
room underground. In a moment,
the laser beam within will scan the
pasted up page. This will result in
14-ounce flexible plastic plates made
and used down below in the pressroom.
Page after page will be run off on the
high speed rotary presses as before and
folded into the finished paper. But
despite automation, computerization, and
the continuing advances of electronics,
the central factor is still the work of
the human brain, the work of human eyes,
and the work of human hands... in creating
that powerful element of communication: the
printed word.